README.md, before:

# Elevator Control System with Genetic Algorithm

An intelligent elevator dispatch system that uses genetic algorithms to optimize elevator assignments and minimize passenger waiting times.

## 🚀 Features

- **Smart Dispatching**: Genetic algorithm optimizes elevator assignments for multiple hall calls
- **Real-time Simulation**: Live elevator movement with accurate timing and positioning  
- **Multi-objective Optimization**: Minimizes waiting time while ensuring service fairness
- **Interactive Interface**: Command-line interface for hall calls and system monitoring
- **Scalable Design**: Supports multiple elevators and floors with configurable parameters

## 📊 Performance

- **35-45% reduction** in average waiting times vs traditional methods
- **<200ms response time** for assignment decisions
- **99.9% accuracy** in elevator position tracking
- Supports buildings up to 50 floors with 10+ elevators

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
├── Main.java          # System controller and simulation loop
├── GA.java           # Genetic algorithm implementation
├── Gene.java         # Base GA operations (selection, crossover, mutation)
├── Car.java          # Elevator state and behavior model
├── HallCall.java     # Passenger request representation
└── ChromosomE.java   # Solution encoding for GA
```

## ⚙️ Algorithm Details

**Genetic Algorithm Parameters:**
- Population Size: 50 chromosomes
- Generations: 100 iterations
- Crossover Rate: 70%
- Mutation Rate: 1%

**Fitness Function:**
```
Fitness = Σ(Travel_Time + Stop_Delays + Request_Age)
```

**Optimization Objectives:**
- Minimize total passenger waiting time
- Prevent request starvation
- Balance elevator utilization
- Ensure directional efficiency

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Java 8 or higher
- Command line interface

### Installation & Run
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/elevator-ga-system
cd elevator-ga-system
javac -d bin src/app/Main.java src/stuff/*.java
java -cp bin app.Main
```

### Usage
1. **Configure System**: Enter number of floors and elevators
2. **Make Hall Calls**: Enter floor + direction (e.g., `6U` for floor 6 going up, `3D` for floor 3 going down)
3. **Monitor Status**: Type `status` to see elevator positions
4. **Exit**: Type `exit` to terminate

### Example Session
```
Enter the no.of Floors : 10
Enter the no.of Elevators : 3
Input Hall calls here in the format (6U / 6D).

6U
Hall call received at floor 6U (time -> 0 s)
car2 assigned to floor 6

status
Current state of car1 is 0I
Current state of car2 is 1U  
Current state of car3 is 6I

exit
```

## 📈 Performance Benchmarks

| Building Type | Avg Wait Time (GA) | Avg Wait Time (FCFS) | Improvement |
|---------------|-------------------|---------------------|-------------|
| 8 floors, 3 elevators | 12.3s | 19.7s | **37%** |
| 20 floors, 6 elevators | 18.9s | 31.4s | **40%** |
| Peak traffic | 22.1s | 35.8s | **38%** |

## 🔧 Configuration

Key parameters in `Gene.java`:
```java
int size = 50;           // Population size
int Generations = 100;   // GA iterations
double Pc = 0.7;         // Crossover probability
double Pm = 0.01;        // Mutation probability
double Tf = 1;           // Inter-floor travel time (seconds)
double Ts = 4;           // Stop duration (seconds)
```

## 🛠️ Technical Details

**Time Complexity:** O(G × P × C × E) where G=generations, P=population, C=calls, E=elevators

**Space Complexity:** O(P × C) for chromosome storage

**Real-time Performance:** 100ms simulation cycles with <200ms GA response time

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

- [ ] Capacity constraints and load balancing
- [ ] Energy consumption optimization
- [ ] Traffic pattern prediction with ML
- [ ] Multi-building support
- [ ] Web-based monitoring interface
- [ ] Integration with IoT sensors

## 📝 Algorithm Workflow

1. **Input Processing**: Receive hall calls in real-time
2. **Population Generation**: Create random elevator assignments
3. **Fitness Evaluation**: Calculate total waiting times
4. **Selection**: Tournament selection of parent solutions
5. **Crossover & Mutation**: Generate new assignment combinations
6. **Optimization**: Evolve population over 100 generations
7. **Assignment**: Deploy best solution to elevator fleet
8. **Simulation**: Update elevator positions and handle passengers

## 📊 System Metrics

- **Response Time**: <200ms for assignment decisions
- **Throughput**: 12-15 calls/minute sustained capacity
- **Accuracy**: 99.9% positioning precision
- **Fairness**: Prevents call starvation with age-based priority
- **Efficiency**: 78-82% elevator utilization rate

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Genetic Algorithm implementation inspired by optimization research
- Real-time simulation techniques for elevator systems
- Multi-objective optimization for passenger service quality

---

⭐ **Star this repo if you found it helpful!**

Commit message:

Revise example session and elevator states in README
Updated example session in README with new floor and elevator numbers, and added current states for additional elevators.

README.md, after:

# Elevator Control System with Genetic Algorithm

An intelligent elevator dispatch system that uses genetic algorithms to optimize elevator assignments and minimize passenger waiting times.

## 🚀 Features

- **Smart Dispatching**: Genetic algorithm optimizes elevator assignments for multiple hall calls
- **Real-time Simulation**: Live elevator movement with accurate timing and positioning  
- **Multi-objective Optimization**: Minimizes waiting time while ensuring service fairness
- **Interactive Interface**: Command-line interface for hall calls and system monitoring
- **Scalable Design**: Supports multiple elevators and floors with configurable parameters

## 📊 Performance

- **35-45% reduction** in average waiting times vs traditional methods
- **<200ms response time** for assignment decisions
- **99.9% accuracy** in elevator position tracking
- Supports buildings up to 50 floors with 10+ elevators

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
├── Main.java          # System controller and simulation loop
├── GA.java           # Genetic algorithm implementation
├── Gene.java         # Base GA operations (selection, crossover, mutation)
├── Car.java          # Elevator state and behavior model
├── HallCall.java     # Passenger request representation
└── ChromosomE.java   # Solution encoding for GA
```

## ⚙️ Algorithm Details

**Genetic Algorithm Parameters:**
- Population Size: 50 chromosomes
- Generations: 100 iterations
- Crossover Rate: 70%
- Mutation Rate: 1%

**Fitness Function:**
```
Fitness = Σ(Travel_Time + Stop_Delays + Request_Age)
```

**Optimization Objectives:**
- Minimize total passenger waiting time
- Prevent request starvation
- Balance elevator utilization
- Ensure directional efficiency

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Java 8 or higher
- Command line interface

### Installation & Run
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/elevator-ga-system
cd elevator-ga-system
javac -d bin src/app/Main.java src/stuff/*.java
java -cp bin app.Main
```

### Usage
1. **Configure System**: Enter number of floors and elevators
2. **Make Hall Calls**: Enter floor + direction (e.g., `6U` for floor 6 going up, `3D` for floor 3 going down)
3. **Monitor Status**: Type `status` to see elevator positions
4. **Exit**: Type `exit` to terminate

### Example Session
```
Enter the no.of Floors : 20
Enter the no.of Elevators : 4
Input Hall calls here in the format (6U / 6D).
4U
Hall call received at floor 4U (time -> 7 s)
car2 assigned to floor 4
Elevator car2 reached 4 at 12 sec.[Arrived floor 4 in 1 sec]
Passenger inside Elevator car2 pressed 12
1D
Hall call received at floor 1D (time -> 23 s)
car1 assigned to floor 1
Elevator car2 reached 12 at 24 sec.[Arrived floor 12 in 9 sec]
Elevator car1 reached 1 at 28 sec.[Arrived floor 1 in 1 sec]
Passenger inside Elevator car1 pressed 0
Elevator car1 reached 0 at 33 sec.[Arrived floor 0 in 2 sec]
status
Current state of car1 is 0I
Current state of car2 is 12I
Current state of car3 is 10I
Current state of car4 is 15I
exit

```

## 📈 Performance Benchmarks

| Building Type | Avg Wait Time (GA) | Avg Wait Time (FCFS) | Improvement |
|---------------|-------------------|---------------------|-------------|
| 8 floors, 3 elevators | 12.3s | 19.7s | **37%** |
| 20 floors, 6 elevators | 18.9s | 31.4s | **40%** |
| Peak traffic | 22.1s | 35.8s | **38%** |

## 🔧 Configuration

Key parameters in `Gene.java`:
```java
int size = 50;           // Population size
int Generations = 100;   // GA iterations
double Pc = 0.7;         // Crossover probability
double Pm = 0.01;        // Mutation probability
double Tf = 1;           // Inter-floor travel time (seconds)
double Ts = 4;           // Stop duration (seconds)
```

## 🛠️ Technical Details

**Time Complexity:** O(G × P × C × E) where G=generations, P=population, C=calls, E=elevators

**Space Complexity:** O(P × C) for chromosome storage

**Real-time Performance:** 100ms simulation cycles with <200ms GA response time

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

- [ ] Capacity constraints and load balancing
- [ ] Energy consumption optimization
- [ ] Traffic pattern prediction with ML
- [ ] Multi-building support
- [ ] Web-based monitoring interface
- [ ] Integration with IoT sensors

## 📝 Algorithm Workflow

1. **Input Processing**: Receive hall calls in real-time
2. **Population Generation**: Create random elevator assignments
3. **Fitness Evaluation**: Calculate total waiting times
4. **Selection**: Tournament selection of parent solutions
5. **Crossover & Mutation**: Generate new assignment combinations
6. **Optimization**: Evolve population over 100 generations
7. **Assignment**: Deploy best solution to elevator fleet
8. **Simulation**: Update elevator positions and handle passengers

## 📊 System Metrics

- **Response Time**: <200ms for assignment decisions
- **Throughput**: 12-15 calls/minute sustained capacity
- **Accuracy**: 99.9% positioning precision
- **Fairness**: Prevents call starvation with age-based priority
- **Efficiency**: 78-82% elevator utilization rate

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Genetic Algorithm implementation inspired by optimization research
- Real-time simulation techniques for elevator systems
- Multi-objective optimization for passenger service quality

---

⭐ **Star this repo if you found it helpful!**
